Add migration guide for HA tracker from Consul/etcd to memberlist (#13011)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/configure/migrate-ha-tracker-to-memberlist.md

---
description: Learn how to migrate the HA tracker from Consul or etcd to memberlist without downtime.
menuTitle: Migrate HA tracker to memberlist
title: Migrate HA tracker from Consul or etcd to memberlist without downtime
weight: 55
---

# Migrate HA tracker from Consul or etcd to memberlist without downtime

Since Grafana Mimir 2.17, the HA tracker supports memberlist as a key-value (KV) store backend. Memberlist is now the recommended KV store for the HA tracker, and the `consul` and `etcd` backends are deprecated.

This guide describes how to migrate your HA tracker configuration from Consul or etcd to memberlist without any downtime.

## Why migrate to memberlist

Memberlist eliminates the need to deploy and maintain a separate consistent KV store (Consul or etcd) for the HA tracker. Benefits include:

- Simplified operations: No separate service to deploy, monitor, and maintain
- Reduced infrastructure: One less component in your deployment
- Built-in: Memberlist is already used by other Mimir components for hash rings and can be used for the HA tracker as well

> ## Prerequisites

Author: ```suggestion
## Before you begin
```

Before starting this migration:

- Ensure you're running Grafana Mimir 2.17 or later
- Have a running Mimir cluster with HA tracker currently using Consul or etcd

## Migration steps

The migration uses Mimir's multi KV store feature to transition from Consul/etcd to memberlist without downtime. The process involves:

1. Configuring a multi KV store with your current backend as primary and memberlist as secondary
2. Enabling mirroring to write to both stores
3. Switching memberlist to be the primary store

> 4. Removing the old backend

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Configuring a multi KV store with your current backend as primary and memberlist as secondary
1. Enabling mirroring to write to both stores
1. Switching memberlist to be the primary store
1. Removing the old backend
```

Reviewer: You might want to make these list items links to the following H2 anchors, but this is totally optional.

> ### Step 1: Configure multi KV store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure multi KV store
```

        mirror_enabled: false
      consul:
        # Your existing Consul configuration
        host: "consul.default.svc.cluster.local:8500"
      memberlist:
        # Memberlist configuration - typically shared with other components
        join_members:
          - mimir-gossip-ring.default.svc.cluster.local:7946
```

**For etcd:**

```yaml
distributor:
  ha_tracker:
    enable_ha_tracker: true
    kvstore:
      store: multi
      multi:
        primary: etcd
        secondary: memberlist
        # Mirroring is disabled by default, we'll enable it in Step 2
        mirror_enabled: false
      etcd:
        # Your existing etcd configuration
        endpoints:
          - etcd.default.svc.cluster.local:2379
      memberlist:
        # Memberlist configuration - typically shared with other components
        join_members:
          - mimir-gossip-ring.default.svc.cluster.local:7946
```

Apply this configuration change. This step requires a rollout of all distributor instances.

After applying this step, all distributors will expose the `/memberlist` admin page on their HTTP port, which you can use to check the health of the memberlist cluster.

> ### Step 2: Enable KV store mirroring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable KV store mirroring
```

> Enable mirroring to write HA tracker state to both the primary (Consul/etcd) and secondary (memberlist) stores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enable mirroring to write the HA tracker state to both the primary (Consul/etcd) and secondary (memberlist) stores.
```

Update the configuration:

```yaml
distributor:
  ha_tracker:
    enable_ha_tracker: true
    kvstore:
      store: multi
      multi:
        primary: consul # or etcd
        secondary: memberlist
        mirror_enabled: true # Changed in this step
```

**Verification:**

Monitor the following metrics to verify mirroring is working:

> - `cortex_multikv_mirror_enabled` – Shows which distributors have mirroring enabled (should be 1 for all)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `cortex_multikv_mirror_enabled`: Shows which distributors have mirroring enabled. This should be set to 1 for all distributors.
```

- `rate(cortex_multikv_mirror_writes_total[$__rate_interval])` – Rate of writes to secondary store (memberlist)
- `rate(cortex_multikv_mirror_write_errors_total[$__rate_interval])` – Rate of write errors (should be 0 or very low)

> After mirroring is enabled, you should see HA tracker keys in the memberlist cluster information on the `/memberlist` admin page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After enabling mirroring, you should see HA tracker keys in the memberlist cluster information on the `/memberlist` admin page.
```

### Step 3: Switch to memberlist as primary

> Switch the primary and secondary stores so memberlist becomes the primary store.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Switch the primary and secondary stores so that memberlist is the primary store.
```

Update the configuration:

```yaml
distributor:
  ha_tracker:
    enable_ha_tracker: true
    kvstore:
      store: multi
      multi:
        primary: memberlist # Changed in this step
        secondary: consul # or etcd - changed in this step
        mirror_enabled: true
```

> From this point on, distributors will read from memberlist and mirror updates to Consul/etcd.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From this point on, distributors read from memberlist and mirror updates to Consul/etcd.
```

> **Verification:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verification:
```

Monitor `cortex_multikv_primary_store` to verify all distributors are using memberlist as the primary store. The `store` label should have the value `memberlist`.

### Step 4: Disable mirroring

> Stop mirroring writes to Consul/etcd.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Stop mirroring writes to Consul and etcd.
```

Update the configuration:

```yaml
distributor:
  ha_tracker:
    enable_ha_tracker: true
    kvstore:
      store: multi
      multi:
        primary: memberlist
        secondary: consul # or etcd
        mirror_enabled: false # Changed in this step
```

**Verification:**

Monitor `cortex_multikv_mirror_enabled` to verify all distributors have disabled mirroring (value should be 0).

### Step 5: Remove multi KV store configuration

Configure the HA tracker to use memberlist directly, removing the multi KV store wrapper.

Update the configuration:

```yaml
distributor:
  ha_tracker:
    enable_ha_tracker: true
    kvstore:
      store: memberlist # Changed in this step
      memberlist:
        join_members:
          - mimir-gossip-ring.default.svc.cluster.local:7946
```

Apply this configuration change. This step requires a rollout of all distributor instances.

> After the rollout completes, distributors will use memberlist directly for the HA tracker. The `cortex_multikv_*` metrics will no longer be exposed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the rollout completes, distributors use memberlist directly for the HA tracker. The `cortex_multikv_*` metrics are no longer exposed.
```

> ### Step 6: Cleanup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Cleanup
```

You have successfully migrated the HA tracker from Consul/etcd to memberlist without downtime.

> If you are no longer using Consul or etcd for any other purpose in your Mimir deployment, you can now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are no longer using Consul or etcd for any other purpose in your Mimir deployment, you can:
```

- Remove the Consul or etcd deployment
- Remove any Consul/etcd monitoring dashboards and alerts
- Remove Consul/etcd client configuration from your Mimir configuration

## Helm-specific guidance

> If you're using the `mimir-distributed` Helm chart, the migration steps are the same but use Helm values instead of direct YAML configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using the `mimir-distributed` Helm chart, the migration steps are the same but use Helm values instead of direct YAML configuration. For example:
```
